---
title: Thoughts on Shirley
date: 2023-03-10 22:00:00 +0800
categories: [Non-technical, Reading]
tags: [bronte]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

Upon reading _Shirley_, I discovered that I had long harboured a certain proletarian resentment towards the mercantile class. However, the depiction of a single tradesman, a clothier and manufacturer, or a ‘businessman’, in modern terms, changed my views entirely. Although their foremost concern is and always should be profit, they need not be blind worshippers or fanatical devotees of Mammon. Indeed, they are capable of noble sentiments! Just yesterday, as I gazed upon a portrait of a silk merchant, instead of my usual aversion, my first impulse was to admire his uncommon air and gentle features.

---

Had Charlotte Brontë read Stendhal's treatise on _l'amour_, she would have likely agreed with the hierarchy of love. The lowest order, which is feigned, would not even be entitled to that sacred name. And ‘physical love’ would be referred to as ‘the love of the eye’ by Charlotte. Robert may admire Shirley's handsome person, but that admiration stems solely from his visual perception and not from the depths of his feelings and sentiments. His heart does not tremble, his cheeks do not flush, and his eyes do not sparkle at the mere mention of her name or the sight of her lovely face.

The love of the mind, which is inherently aristocratic, might not have been familiar to Charlotte. However, an alternative form of love, which I would call ‘sisterly love’, does exist and went unnoticed by Stendhal. Charlotte's marriage was a prime example of such a feeling. While the Revd Nicholls genuinely admired her, Charlotte could only offer him pity and sympathy. _After_ their union, she began to _discover_ his virtues, which, while admirable, did not ignite her passion. An intellectual mismatch prevented the village curate from appreciating the renowned author reading her new book's opening, and in turn, Charlotte became a simple parson's _plain_ wife. It is worth remembering that, in her male persona of William Crimsworth, Charlotte argued vehemently against marrying a mere doll. If a man's moral probity, without any romantic or intellectual qualities, is equivalent to a woman's physical charm, then Charlotte had, despite herself, resorted to what she had despised, as a ‘sour old maid.’

So, perhaps the moral is: marry your heart's desire, God willing, or pass this life of joy and peace at the side of a sisterly wife.

---

I think I have found the Revd Nicholls in Charlotte's writing: it's that Christ-like parson, Mr Hall, who is condemned to celibacy and living with his bibliophile spinster sister by the cruel authoress.

---

Charlotte Brontë set out to write a ‘condition of England’ novel. But in the valley of the shadow of death, the west wind of serendipity blew through her pages, bringing back her beloved mother's spirit, breathing the breath of life into Anne, and sounding the wedding bells. Indeed, a lighter tone, a more prolonged sense of joy and a more abundant spring of hope, which is ‘the only medicine for the miserable,’ cannot be found in all Charlotte's mature writing. William Crimsworth, having secured a rosy future, was beset with a sudden bout of ‘hypochondria’; Frances shed inexplicable tears on her wedding day, despite her beaming smile; even amidst their blissful married life, the incident of the mad dog had to be thrown in.

The book begins with the breaking of Robert's frames, revealing a world of turmoil, and then Caroline's dragging forlorn lovesickness occupies the central stage, yet the agitation of the disaffected and the brewing of the impending storm are observably looming large in the background, and the political unrest of the time is never far from the characters' minds, while the threat of violence is always present. The plot climaxes in the attack of the mill, after which the novel takes a sudden turn, and the old Brontëan theme of romance comes back to the fore and would not go away. The language takes on a lighter, indeed humorous tone—which is even conspicuous in the depiction of the attempt on Robert's life—as the author weaves a tale of love and joy that sweeps the reader (and herself) up in its embrace, leaving behind the darkness and despair that had once seemed so all-encompassing.